---
layout: post
title: "Korovkin's theorems"
---

Since this is my first blog entry, a few words in advance. I want to collect notable theorems and small bits of mathematics which I come across during my PhD. The entries are not complete and they will contain errors. It's more like my personal notepad.

---


Pavel Korovkin's theorems are a bit surprising, since they allow to show point-wise convergence of a sequence of linear operators under very mild conditions. Most notably, the point-wise convergence of the operators at three points is enough!

This post is based on Section IV.2 from {% cite wernerFunktionalanalysis2018 %}.



### Korovkin's first theorem

In the following, $$ C[0,1]$$ denotes the Banach space of continuous functions on the interval $$[0,1]$$ equipped with the uniform norm $$\Vert f \Vert_{\max} = \max_{x \in [0,1]} \vert f(x)\vert$$.

**Theorem 1** (Korovkin's first theorem):

*Let $$(T_n)_{n}$$ be a sequence of bounded linear operators $$T_n : C[0,1] \to C[0,1]$$.
We also assume the operators to be positive, hence, for every continuous function $$f \in C[0,1]$$ with $$f \geq 0$$ we have $$T_n f \geq 0$$.*

*If for the three first monomials $$p_0(x) = 1, p_1(x) = x$$ and $$p_2(x) = x^2$$
the operators are point-wise convergent*

$$ T_n p_0 \to p_0, \quad
T_n p_1 \to p_1, \quad \text{and} \quad
T_n p_2 \to p_2, \quad \text{for } n \to \infty,
$$

*then*

$$
T_n x \to x, \quad \text{for all } x \in C[0,1].
$$

<br/>

*Sketch of the proof:*

A difficulty here is to get a good global estimate for the variation of a continuous function $$ f \in C[0,1] $$ between arbitray points $$x, y \in [0,1]$$, i.e. something like

$$
\vert f(x) - f(y) \vert \leq b(ε, \vert x - y \vert).
$$

Continuity gives locally an estimate

$$ | x - y | ≤ \sqrt{δ}
\quad ⇒ \quad | f(x) - f(y) | ≤  ε $$

The trick is to extend this estimate to the region $$ \vert x - y \vert ≥ \sqrt{δ} $$. We use the very conservative estimate

$$ \vert f(x) - f(y) \vert ≤ 2 \Vert f \Vert_{\max},$$

and combine these two estimates by defining

$$
b(ε, \vert x - y \vert) = ε + 2 \Vert f \Vert_{\max} \frac{\vert x - y \vert^2}{\delta}.
$$

Outside of the region $$ \vert x - y \vert ≤ \sqrt{δ} $$ the fraction is $$ ≥ 1 $$
which brings the conservative estimate into play. We notice that we initially had to pick $$\sqrt{δ}$$ to ensure that
the conservative estimate enters the final estimate quadratically, hence, it decays fast if $$ x$$ is close to $$ y$$.


The rest of the proof requires a few more manipulation of inequalities which I don't want to carry out in detail here.
It uses the fact that $$ b(ε, \vert x - y \vert) $$ is a polynomial of degree 2, which brings the assumption into play.
And the positivity is used to


---

#### Application of Korovkin's first theorem

A consequence of the proof is the Weierstraß-approximation theorem
which states that the set of polynomials is dense in the Banach space of continuous functions $$C[0,1]$$.

With the notation of the theorem, the operators $$T_n$$ maps a function to its $$n$$th Bernstein polynomial.
These operators satisfy the conditions of Korovkin's first theorem!

### Korovkin's second theorem

Let $$ C_{2 \pi}$$ denote the space of periodic continious functions on $$ [ -π, π] $$ with uniform norm.

**Theorem 1** (Korovkin's second theorem):

*Let $$(T_n)_{n}$$ be a sequence of positive, bounded, linear operators $$T_n : C_{2π} → C_{2π}$$.*

*If for $$ p_0(x) = 1, p_1(x) = \cos(x)$$ and $$p_2(x) = \sin(x)$$
the operators are point-wise convergent*

$$ T_n p_0 \to p_0, \quad
T_n p_1 \to p_1, \quad \text{and} \quad
T_n p_2 \to p_2, \quad \text{for } n \to \infty,
$$

*then*

$$
T_n x \to x, \quad \text{for all } x \in C_{2π}.
$$

<br/>


#### Application of Korovkin's second theorem

There exists a continious, $$2 π$$ periodic function $$f$$ for which the Fourier series

$$
s_n(x) = \sum_{k=-n}^n \hat{f}(k) e^{i k x}
$$

does not converge at every point {$ cite wernerFunktionalanalysis2018 $}.

However, if we use the mean of the values $$s_n$$, namely,

$$
T_n f := \frac{1}{n} \sum_{l=1}^n s_l
$$

we obtain a point-wise convergent approximation of $$C_{2π}$$ by Krovkin's theorem.
This statement is called [Fejér's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fej%C3%A9r%27s_theorem).

It implies the second Weierstraß approximation theorem: The trigeometric polynomials are dense in $$C_{2π}$$.


References
----------

{% bibliography --cited %}
